= Fediverse =

The fediverse is a collection of federated applications that use common  
protocols and decentralized servers. I will be focusing mainly on Mastodon.

== Social Media ==
=== Why do people use it ===
    1. To stay in touch with what friends are doing (42%)
    2. To stay up-to-date with news and current events (41%)
    3. To fill up spare time (39%)
    4. To find funny or entertaining content (37%)
    5. General networking with other people (34%)
    6. Because friends are already on them (33%)
    7. To share photos or videos with others (32%)
    8. To share my opinion (30%)
    9. To research new products to buy (29%)
    10. To meet new people (27%)
=== Why people avoid it ===
    1. Find it a time waste. 
    2. Don't want to take the time to learn how.
    3. Not intertested in it. 
    4. Don't see any value in it.
    5. Concerned about their information/identity getting out.
    6. Privacy and advertising concerns. 
=== Why do businesses use it ===
    1. Gaining traffic
    2. Interacting with your customers
    3. Increased sales
    4. Reputation management
    5. Marketing research
    6. Inexpensive
    7. The reach is global
    8. Save on advertising
    9. 2.82 Billion people worldwide on social media

== Silos ==

The silos are centralized monolithic servers that control all the data,  
identities, and access.  

    1. Facebook
    2. YouTube
    3. Instagram
    4. Twitter
    5. Google+
    6. Instagram
    7. Tumblr
    8. Pintrest

=== Federated Alternatives ===
    1. Mastodon
    2. Pleroma
    3. GNU Social
    4. Gab
    5. Pixelfed
    6. PeerPx
    7. Peertube
    8. Funkwhale
    9. Friendica
    10. Diaspora
    11. Hubzilla
    12. Nextcloud
    13. Plume
    14. WriteFreely
    15. MissKey
    16. And many more every day

=== Protocols ===
    1. ActiviryPub
    2. DFRN
    3. Diaspora Network
    4. OStatus
    5. XMPP
    6. Zot & Zot6

== Mastodon ==

Because Mastadon uses ActivityPub any other server that uses it can share data  
like toots or whatever each of them calls their posts. For instance, I an share  
a video on PeerTube, share and boost and comment on it from Mastadon and others  
who don't even have an account on PeerTube can see it, comment on it, follow it,  
and share it.  

Think of federation in the way you do eMail. You may have an account on Gmail..
and I have an account on HoTMaiL, and yet another person may have an account on  
their work's privately run Exchange server. But sending and receiving email between  
us is straight forward and we don't need accounts on each other's servers. 

Visually, to the end user, Mastodon looks like Twitter, or more specifically an  
interface called TweetDeck. However, it doesn't have to look that way, you can  
even use certain IRC clients to access your accounts.  

Most interfaces however, seem to be multicolumn and I will describe this based on  
the ones I have worked with.  

To start with, because Mastodon is a big furry elephant like thing rather than a  
bird, posts made are called "toots". I will pause while you snicker. If you choose  
to befriend someone you "follow" them. Where you connect is called an "instance".  
If you like someone's toot that is called a boost, which will cause it to be  
reposted to everyone who considers you a friend (your followers). 

Instances can and are run by anyone. One of the servers called "Pleroma" is made  
specifically to be lightweight enough that you can install it on a RaspberryPi.  
This is the major difference between the Fediverse and the Silos. Everyone  
can run their own instance if they choose to, or they can connect through free  
ones setup and maintained by other. A company could setup an instance for their  
employees only. A family can setup and instance for their own use. A club could  
be formed and charge membership. And they are so cheap and easy to setup and run  
no one "needs" to monetize. You can be a member on one or more instance, and  
if you want, you can move all your data from one instance to another. Instances  
tend to have a theme or general common interest. So you pick one that fits your  
interests.  

Normally there are 3 main columns or views. Home, local, and federated view. The  
home view contains all the toots from everyone you "follow" regardless of their  
instance. In addition to that, if someone you follow boosts a toot you will see  
that too. In the local view are all the toots from everyone on your instance.  
Of course, and any toot any of them have choosen to boost. Then comes the  
Federated view. Care to take a guess? Everyone on your instance, everyone they  
follow and everyone they follow etc. toots, and boosts. 

Federation happens, because once their is at least one person following another  
on a different instance, now the instances federate because of it. 

On the silos, someone you don't really know based on information you are not privy  
to makes decisions about what you can and can't see, say, and in what order you  
get to do so. You timelines are dictated by by algorithm and you are shown those  
things they have determined will generate them the most revenue by exposing you to  
advertisements.  Their business model dictates this. They are large with large  
servers that need large groups of maintainers with large salaries.

In the fediverse the low cost to run an instance allows people to do it without vast  
need to get income from it. Some people use things like Patreon and their open  
source alternatives like Liberapay.  

You can currate your views by blocking, or muting anyone you choose not to hear from  
for any reason you like. You can block a particular conversation you are in. You can  
even block or mute whole instances.  

Interestingly enough an instance can do the same thing. An instance can set rules as  
to what is acceptable speech, topics, and behaviors as well as what the repricussions  
for such infractions are. This may cause some controversy, but the ability to simply  
take all your data and move to another instance or create your own should negate any  
issue this causes. 

If you are interested there are instance finders, node lists and other helpful  
sites that you can start with. 
- https://joinmastodon.org/ 
- https://instances.social/

Or if you know of a specific instance (like if a friend tells you theirs) you can  
just go to it and if they are open to new users you can join. 

== Recent Influx ==
Free Speech has been a big reason for people leaving Twitter and Tumblr for Mastadon.  
The latest big move was due to one of India's Supreme Court lawyers (Sanjay Hegde)  
having his Twitter account suspended twice. Once for an image of August Landmesser,  
refusing to perform the Nazi salute and again for a poem that protested the hanging of  
two revolutionaries. 
- http://tiny.cc/hvhdgz

I leave you to make your own decisions on this. 

== My Links ==
- http://bradleysmall.com/

== Read More ==
- http://tiny.cc/pwhdgz
